---
title: NLnet
url: https://www.nlnet.nl/foundation/request/
deadline: 2016-10-01
amount: 30000.00
currency: EU
---

### Abstract: explain the whole project

Almost all news published in paper form and on the internet are text based narratives like "who did what, where, when, to whom, and why". Presently, we see far more articles in volume but with shorter content length and bad fact checking due to small budgets. The truth is getting harder to ascertain. Additionally, the increasingly fast pace of internet publishing and social media, another problem  emerges which is information overload. Consider, multiple publications with differing views and biases who report on the same topic or event. What commonly happens is Publication A will omit a fact, while Publication B will embellish a non-fact, and Publication C will present a hard fact that is contradictory of the other two points. Meanwhile, a source may confirm the inaccuracy as reported by Publication A and B on Twitter but the original articles will never be updated and people never learn the truth as Publication C is not read (or understood) due to information overload. These factors put accuracy and integrity of news at risk, which makes the public vulnerable to persausion and propaganda from both governments and corporations.

Thumbtack is an open source narrative mapping tool that solves the problem of falsified, dubious, and contradictory stories as well as helps with information overload by providing an "overview interface" that corroborates narratives across multiple sources and formats. 

Traditional journalism starts with a lead for a story, then progresses to collecting information from sources to produce a narrative. The final writing" stage aims to accurately convey the truth. Good journalism contains numerous citations to source material such as documents, emails, or coroborated quotations from interviews. Thumbtack will be an open source web application can be used by a solo journalist, small teams, or part of a collaborative crowd sourced effort to collect information that can be verified and fact checked at a glance. 

The Thumbtack application will allow users to submit evidence and citations from raw source material as well as verifiable facts gleened from already published articles across differing versions of a story (e.g. multiple publications) and numerous media formats or sources (e.g. news posts, leaked documents, archives, RSS feeds, Twitter, and other web APIs).

The result of data inputed into a Thumbtack instance will be a timeline based data visualization of interconnected linear events. Imagine a hybrid of a bar graph mixed together with a geographic map like Google Maps. The horizontal axis will display a chronological timeline of events while the vertical axis will display a "depth of information" that can be zoomed into. In Google Maps where a user zooms from Country to City to Neighborhood to Street, in Thumbtack users can zoom from Main Point 1 to Supporting Point 2, to Supportiong Point 3 to Point 4 which is a  verifiable document or testimony. Each point added will be weighted in either an affirmative or negative direction and also give more weight to verifiable evidence over hearsay or uncoroborated testimonies. Thus the fully zoomed out view of a narrative will make it easy to get an accurate and truthful overview without having to read through numerous articles and source documents and try ascertain the truth of story.

### Describe your target community

The primary community Thumbtack will target for initial prototyping and use cases is the investigative journalism community. Secondarily we will work with the freedom of information community as there is an overlap between the two. Many professional investigative journalists at present still use notepads filled with paper to keep track of data points in a story. When these journalists work with numerous sources on complicated stories that involve many events and people, details and the ordering of events often get confused. This can have a significant affect on the outcome of their hardwork due to simple human error and oversights. The second community (those concerned with freedom of information) often deal with another problem- too much information. Whether it is FOIA requests, whistleblowers, a hacking compromise, or public open source data (Twitter, LinkedIn, blogs, etc...) the modern digitized world is swimming in information. However, this information is often highly unorganized, asymetric in its organization, or siloed into different filter bubbles. There is also another group that has a certain degree of overlap as the previous other two and that group consists of the people who contribute to Wikipedia, Quora, and similar collaborative knowledge repositories. This group usually does this not as a paid career, but rather as a passion and hobby. All three groups- journalists, freedom of information proponents, and collaborative knowledge contributors all care about the pursuit of truth, justice, and creating a better informed society. Thus, we believe these three distinct groups and especially their overlapping center will constitute Thumbtacks core user base and community.

### Which parts of the project will NLnet's contribution be used for

The contribution from NLnet will be used for user interface design, user prototyping and user testing, and primiarly for software development as that is the most time consuming aspect. A small fraction of funding (less than 500 euros) will  pay for a webserver for two years, the rest of NLnets contribution will go to living expenses for the two developers working on the project: Brennan Novak and MC McGrath. This funding will see Thumbtack through to an initial beta release. After that stage, further funding options will be sought based on the user interest, public response, and the overall direction target community thinks the project will benefit them.

### Compare your own project with existing projects; what's new and original?

Wikipedia - https://wikipedia.org
The thriving community and contributors around the world who created the worlds largest repository of information about it's inhabitants, their intellectual output, and goings on is a huge inspiration. However, Wikipedia is very broad in scope as a page can exist about anything including scientific and math theories. It is often forgotten that Wikipedia's success actually stands on top of a free software project called MediaWiki that runs underneath the website. Numerous other communities, people, and projects relie on MediaWiki to function.

Despite starting out as an open source software project, we plan to grow Thumbtack beyond just a tool for journalists and small teams into a thriving collaborative community of contributors like that of Wikipedia. The key difference between Wikipedia and the projected Thumbtack community, is that the later will be less about collecting all forms of information and closer to narrative based information collections such as legal trials, documentary filmmaking, and investigative journalism. This will result in a very different interface and relationship with information than Wikipedia, which is modeled after a traditional print encyclopedia.

TimelineJS - http://timeline.knightlab.com
A wonderful project that came out of Knight Lab is TimelineJS, which is an open source Javascript library with a minimally themable CSS / HTML theme that can be self hosted or serverd from Knight Lab's CDN. The creators built a nice hook that allows rendering of data hosted in a Google Spreadsheet which empowers a range of non-technical users to create timelines to embed in their blog posts. In our initial experiments we may actually build on top of (or fork) the TimelineJS codebase if it makes sense to do so.

What is significantly new and orignal about Thumbtack compared to TimelineJS is three aspects. The first is that Thumbtack adds the ability to have "depth" of relevantly linked information behind each given point in the timeline as well as "weighting" of points to prove or disprove claims in a narrative. The second difference relies of the previous feature in that Thumbtack will allow a nesting or grouping of other relevant narratives which allows for constructing larger narractives. Lastly, Thumbtack will offer an intuitive interface and data storage archive system for the information being served.

### How will you promote these developments to your target community?

Early on we plan to collaborate with people passionate about a few narratives. Our requirements for these narratives will be that they have contentious, debatable points of view, and currently have confusing outcomes. One example of this is the public and political debate that "mass adoption of encryption helps terrorists". Once we find people interested in these topics, we will start collaborating with them collecting information pertaining to these topics. We will save this information in a rough fashion that allows for initial prototyping of the data visualization interface. During this stage we will discover what collaborative workflows seem natural and already exist and which need to be developed as new software. Additionally, once a minimal amount of design has been completed, we plan to publish the narrative timelines of these experiments. This will help promote the concept, workflows, and hopefully generate interest in the fully realized software tool. As software development progresses, we plan to speak at various open source, hacker, journalism, and other transmedia related conferences about our progress.

Transparency Toolkit has been building a reputation in the investigative journalism community for the last few years. MC McGrath has presented at CCC Congress, re:publica, Logan Symposium, RightsCon, and other relevant events. Brennan Novak has presented work at CCC Camp and Congress as well as other open source design related events as well. Our work has been featured in mainstream press and we have relationships with many journalism and publications. We plan to leverage these exisiting connections to bootstrap our initial interest and experimentation with Thumbtack.

